like the number of casualties from
military conflicts in the last decade is
like less than how many men choose to
take their own life in one year
but I think the diagnosis of the problem
is beautifully put right and I think the
best thing I think chat was talking
about this
why do I feel like [ __ ] even though all
of my necessities are met and I also
like this sentence almost everything
that's enjoyable feels like it's lit
lacks of central meaning so the first
thing is I want to know like do you guys
want me to read more suffer do you guys
actually want to talk about things
I I am kind of confused about I feel
like I should talk about this
um but I need to know okay so the first
thing is do you guys know how in the
last seven years you guys know how much
the suicide rate under the age of 18 has
changed
let's start there
that's a yes-or-no question well played
yeah so it's gone up it's gone up by
about 50% in seven years
right and that's like that's crazy so
the first thing is I think if you guys
are making observations about the world
do your best to find data okay so I
think it's fine to have theories and the
internet loves theories right like
people on reddit or like always posting
their opinions about [ __ ] but ultimately
I'm a scientist so like I want data so
the first question is is here oh
leukemias premise correct are people
suffering at a greater rate than they
used to and actually the answer is yes
so we have evidence so mental health has
now surpassed cancer and cardiovascular
disease in the United States is the
number one contributor of morbidity and
mortality mental health now costs this
nation more than cancer and heart
attacks so it's it's like it's crazy but
the data actually supports exactly what
hero leukemia is noticing which is that
like the primary problem we face today
is not physical its mental so as we look
back like let's say 50 years a hundred
years 200 years a thousand years the
main sources of stress or challenges
that humans faced were not mental they
were physical like people had trouble
finding enough food people had trouble
getting eaten by like lions and tigers
people had trouble like dealing with
winters and there like these like
famines and stuff from like the early
1900's and 1800s that like wiped out
large swathes of people like there was a
flu in the last hundred years I forget
which one it was that wiped out like
fifteen to thirty percent of the
population of Europe or something like
15 percent of the population died from
the flu the flu doesn't really kill
anyone anymore
so the challenges that was it Spanish
flu I don't remember
so the challenges that Humanity is
facing are changing like it's not
infections that are killing us anymore
it's not even like I mean chronic
illnesses are killing us but we've
gotten way better in terms of like
cardiovascular disease the leading cause
of like problems in people's lives now
or is mental health so the question is
why
and I think the answer in my mind is
just it's a little bit simplistic and
it's because we're not worrying about
the other [ __ ] anymore because we don't
die from it like I could get the flu but
like I'm not I don't stress about the
flute right what I stress about now is
meaning fulfillment and at the same time
that we're sort of caught in the process
of conquering physical illness our
brains are being a sale to by technology
so I don't think we realized what we
were doing when like you know people
talk about the end of the world being
like nuclear apocalypse
you guys know what I think is gonna be
the end of humanity you know what I
really think is gonna be the end of
humanity virtual reality girlfriends and
boyfriends attached to sexual
instruments with haptic feedback does
anybody know what that means
you guys know what happed ik feedback is
so like someone is going to develop a
device like so about 15 years ago I was
involved with my dad was actually
involved with a really interesting like
cancer diagnosis device so this was back
when like what this is still going on
but I don't know if you guys know this
but
you know like the Middle East has a lot
of American institutions that are
opening up branches they're like
especially your hospitals like Cleveland
Clinic and like Duke and things like
that are all like opening up like
Medical like hospitals and stuff in in
the Middle East like especially like in
around the UAE
and and so so my dad was involved in the
production of a device which was a glove
which would allow him so that so he puts
on a glove in Houston Texas at MD
Anderson and someone in Hawaii is
wearing a glove and what happens is the
person who's wearing the glove then
palpates a breast right so like when
you're doing cancer diagnosis for breast
cancer like the the the doctor feels the
breast and you like feel for lumps and
then what my dad feels so like the the
the glove measures the resistance and
then translates that feeling and then
creates a sensation on my dad's hand so
he can like palpate a breast from like a
thousand miles away
right so like the sexual stuff aside
like it's a clinical diagnosis right and
so that technology is going to start
getting used by virtual reality suit so
what's going to happen is we're gonna
like put on a haptic feedback suit so
I'm gonna put on a pair of scrubs that
has all these like pressure sensors and
what's gonna happen is there's gonna be
like some sort of like genital device
right like something on the spectrum of
like a dildo or vibrator or like flesh
light or something like that and there's
gonna be virtual reality pornography
that you're going to be able to feel
and then like somewhere along this
doomsday scenario is going to be like an
AI that's a girlfriend so you're going
to go on virtual dates with an AI that
throws temper tantrums and then like
sometimes doesn't put out and
and then you'll be able to like have
your sexual needs gratified and then
you're gonna stop like procreating with
regular humans and then the human race
is going to die out but these are the
pressures like this is not something
that our brain was designed to deal with
it's scary
and on the other end of the spectrum
like that's like a doomsday apocalypse
in this scenario but on the other end of
the spectrum is the like button
you guys know like when when Facebook
blew up it was because of the like
button
like Facebook was a thing that college
kids used until the like button
and we're in a society where like
there's all this kind of FOMO kind of
stuff like people talk about this stuff
right they talk about FOMO
and everyone was envious of other people
but like envy wasn't shoved in your face
eight hours a day like you didn't just
you know you didn't wake up open up your
bedroom window and see a beach with
someone else like hanging out on the
beach and then you would put on your
coat and walk into like the
Massachusetts winter and then walk to
your job and take the subway like we're
bombarded with all of the amazing stuff
that people are doing and so this is
kind of like a huge assault on our
psychology because our brains are
designed to compare they're designed to
compare that's what they're made for
like monkeys compare humans compare it's
just what we do
and so technology is taking advantage of
all of the stuff in our brain the other
basic problem is as our basic needs get
met like we think about Maslow's
hierarchy of needs like food and shelter
and stuff we're sort of getting taken
care of you know you have experiments
with universal basic income in some
parts of Scandinavia and so previously
in society we needed people to produce
stuff for society to function but why do
we as a society value jobs because jobs
were necessary for the function of
humanity like you needed to have a
cooper to make a barrel and you needed
to have a blacksmith to do things and
you needed to have a farmer but it's
technology produces as is like machines
get better
his automation gets better as lab-grown
meat comes online like what do we need
people for we don't need people for
anything
it's like we don't need people for stuff
you can now grow in once like in one
story block you can grow like a thousand
acres worth of lettuce on one square
block right we have lab-grown meat so
instead of like pastures and animals
like we can just grow that [ __ ] in lap
and all the big like fast food producers
are actually investing in this stuff so
I think it's gonna be edible in the next
10 15 years and so human beings don't
need to have like you don't need to work
for like food and shelter and stuff like
in the night you know a lifetime it's
going to happen
so the more that our needs get met the
more we move ups Maslow's hierarchy of
needs and then we get to this thing
called self-actualization I think mental
health is somewhere in that realm right
like that's the spectrum of mental
health meaning purpose I'm a no one and
then not only are we army needs getting
bad but then we have like social media
that's telling us that other people are
like more important than we are
right and that's where you get this
situation this is why mental illness is
higher than ever before because our our
our survive like our other needs are
being met so like the mind is what's
left the mind is where the major source
of stresses if you think about you know
our our sympathetic nervous system are
our fight-or-flight system was designed
to help us against tigers and snakes and
now what does it do what is it what do
we get stressed out up mortgages
quarterly reports
getting a promotion at the end of the
year our sympathetic nervous system was
not designed to be active for months at
a time which is what it is now if you're
a college senior with a liberal arts
degree and a pile of debt your
sympathetic nervous system your
adrenaline system is going haywire for a
year it's not designed to do that we
were supposed to see a tiger in the span
of 15 minutes run away kill it or get
eaten that's what our nervous system was
designed for it's not designed for these
protracted periods of stress
that's also why obesity is getting worse
like I know we can talk about obesity in
the physiology of obesity but stress
literally makes you fat it literally
makes you fat so when you have a high
level of cortisol
what happens is cortisol mobilizes blood
sugar so it causes your body to like
break down fat and protein and glycogen
and put blood blood I put sugar in your
blood because the purpose of cortisol
was after you run away from a tiger for
the next 4 to 12 hours the tiger may be
sniffing your your footprints and may be
showing up so you need to have a lot of
energy available so your body would put
a bunch of sugar into your blood so that
you have easily available energy over
the next 12 hours
and so what we used to do like what
you'd use like if you see a tiger and
you run away
you're gonna hike for the next eight
miles to get away from the area that the
Tigers and that's what cortisol is
designed for is to provide you with
energy so you can hike eight miles now
when I'm worried about making mortgage
at the end of the month like what do I
do I sit here in this chair and so then
my body gets confused my body's like we
have a bunch of sugar in our blood we
must have just eaten a meal let's
release some insulin
and then if we release some insulin then
what it's going to do is cause that
sugar to be stored as fat so literally
what cortisol does is cause muscle
breakdown to increase your blood sugar
and then your body your your pancreas is
like oh [ __ ] we have a bunch of blood
sugar because we don't burn it like we
were supposed like we used to do and
then it's like oh we must have had a big
meal so let's release insulin so then
what happens is you get this okay
so
how am I gonna do this real you get this
this is called a buffalo huh
this is what happens when you have a
cortisol tumor
this is literally what a cortisol tumor
does to your body look at that
[Music]
and this is the [ __ ] that we have done
this is where it stressed us we're
stressed all the time this is what's
happening to you physiologically
obesity rates in this country or 30% is
that due to sugary beverages sure
it's also due to stress stress literally
makes you fat people talk about stress
eating like it's a psychological problem
it's not a [ __ ] psychological problem
it's a physiologic problem
and like look at this
like this is what stress is doing to us
[Music]
so I think my hero leukemia spot-on
right that something is changing in our
society
that we're killing ourselves at a higher
rate than ever before
and you could talk about you know like
gender dynamics a lot I mean I think
that there's a lot of gender inequality
but I think it's shocking that
let me just think about you see if I can
find the statistic
[Music]
men killed so 80% of suicides in this
country are men right why are men
killing themselves I think we have like
something like thirty or seventy
thousand people a year killed themselves
thirty to seventy thousand men a year
which is an astronomical number like the
number of casualties from military
conflicts in the last decade is like
less than how many men choose to take
their own life in one year
like that's staggering
so I I do think that there's a lot of
gender discrimination in in this country
and in the world and I think that things
are not equal between men and women and
I think that a lot of men are really
struggling right now and because of all
this dialogue around gender
discrimination like men don't feel open
about sharing like you can't like the
male victim is like it's hard to be a
male victim nowadays
right because there are a privileged
class I see this a lot because I work
with like these men come to my office
and it's hard because they can't
complain
and so I think that there's the
pressures I think by Hiro leukemia has
it spot-on
that why is it that most advanced
countries in the world are also
countries with the highest rates of
suicide
it's because the best of the most
developed countries push us towards the
top of Maslow's hierarchy of needs
right so that mental illness is what
becomes more problematic social media
and technology definitely exacerbate
that problem
[Music]
humans have always questioned the
meaning of life and it seems like we're
getting further from the answer as time
goes by absolutely because the meaning
of life used to be like you didn't have
the luxury of the meaning of life
like my grandmother grew up with it like
11 people living in like a 10 by 10 room
like literally like 11 people living in
that room
and
life expectancy in her day was like in
the 50s so the meaning of life was
[ __ ] surviving that was the meaning
of life back then we conquered that so
now we have to find more ephemeral and
diaphanous meanings of life
it's these subtle things it's like
Dharma
purpose meaning like before it was just
about getting by like all this is
boomers nowaday they're talking about
like lack of purpose was like because
their job was just like they they were
just trying to get by and now we're
doing a pretty good job of getting by so
now our challenges are more mental
and I would be a little bit careful
um about assuming that let people were
happier before like that's a really
common bias I don't really know if I
have data to support that like everyone
says that right like life was simpler
when we used to live in nature and
things like that
I mean infant mortality used to be
something like 30% I find it hard to
believe that like a thousand years ago
when infant mortality was 30% like
people were happier
like I'm not sure